In my experience,
code coverage is one of the most controversial
metrics in the world of unit tests.
It is defined as the measure used to describe the degree to which
the code of your program is covered by your tests.
In other words, how many lines of your code are executed by your tests?
This metric is collected by a tool that traces the calls made by
the tests to the classes of the application and reports the
percentage of the code that is executed.
For this demo, I'll show you how to use JaCoco,
a popular code coverage library for Java,
first with Maven and then with Gradle.
I have opened the project name CodeCoverage,
which contains configuration files for Gradle and Maven,
so you can import the project in your IDE using either tool.
For Maven, in the pom.xml file,
you just have to add the JaCoco plugin to the build configuration.
Then,
you need to ensure that the JaCoco agent will run when the
tests are run with the goal prepare‑agent.
This agent is going to collect the coverage information.
In addition, most of the time,
we'll want a report with this coverage information so we can configure the
report goal to be executed during any of the phases of the build.
In this example, we are going to execute the test phase,
so this is the phase I set up here.
There's no need to import the changes because,
in the terminal, I'm going to execute mvnw test.
Let's wait for a few seconds.
Great.
In the project navigator, refresh if you don't see the target directory.
You'll see a jacoco.exec file.
This file contains all the information collected by the JaCoco agent,
and it can be consumed by many tools, but I'm interested in the report.
Here, in the site directory, you can see a JaCoco directory and,
inside, the reports generated in HTML, CSV,
and XML formats.
Let's open index.html. Here you can see the coverage by package, 65% for
the product package and 89% for the reward package.
In total, 79% of the code was covered by the tests.
Only 69 lines were not covered.
There is more information here, and you can even click on the packages,
for example the reward package, to see the same information
for the classes contained in this package.
And if you click on a class,
let's say RewardService, that is completely covered by the tests, you
can see its methods. And if we click on one of them,
you can even see the lines of the class. In green,
the ones that were executed; in red,
the ones that were not executed; and in yellow,
the branches that were not executed.
For example,
in this case, it seems that a test for the case in
which the order is null is missing.
Anyway, let's go back to the index file, 79% of coverage.
If we need to check that a specific percentage is being met,
we can use another goal of the JaCoco plugin. Back to the pom.xml file, I'm
going to paste another execution element, this time to set up the check goal
at the test phase. In its configuration section,
I'm passing a rule. At the package level,
I require a line coverage minimum of 70%.
Otherwise, the build will fail.
There are a lot of options we can specify with this plugin. I'll
leave a link to the documentation of this goal in the README file
for this module. But in this case,
since the percentage of coverage for the product package was around 60%,
the build should fail. So I'm going to run mvnw test again.
There you have it, build failure. Rule violated for package
com.wiredbraincoffee.product. Lines covered ratio is .62,
but the expected minimum is .7.
Now for Gradle, I'll open the build.gradle file. First,
we need to add the JaCoco plugin.
Then, there are two ways to execute the coverage report.
One is adding to the test task finalized by jacocoTestReport.
This way, the report will be always generated after the tests run.
The other way is by adding a jacocoTestReport task element,
specifying that it depends on the test task.
This way, when executing this task,
tests are required to run before generating the report.
The choice depends on how you want to execute the coverage report, either
by executing the test task or the jacocTestReport task.
For this example,
I'll use the test task. Now to mirror the Maven configuration, I'll add a
jacoco section to configure the toolVersion and another one to verify the
coverage ratio with the same parameters used by Maven. And in the terminal,
I'm going to execute gradlew test. Great. In the build directory, in
addition to the reports directory,
you can see there's such a jacoco directory that contains the EXEC file with
the coverage information. Inside the reports directory, we can find another
jacoco directory with the report in HTML format.
Let's open it.
The report is the same as the one generated by Maven. Back to the terminal,
if I execute gradlew jacocoTestCoverageVerification, the build fails. Rule
violated for package com.wiredbraincoffee.product. Lines covered ratio is
0.6, but expected minimum is .7. All right, let's wrap up this module.